# Objective: Explain Roles in detail

## Ansible Roles
- It's a feature of ansible that allows you to organize the contents into reusable, modular and shareable components.
- Roles provide a standardized way to group related tasks, variables, files, templates, handlers, and metadata, making complex automation projects easier to manage, maintain, and scale

Basically, an Ansible role is a self-contained unit of automation that encapsulates everything needed to perform a specific function or configure a particular component.

Instead of writing all tasks in a single playbook, the roles promote separate grouping of automation content together in a predefined **directory structure**. Thus, promoting code reusability and also a pre-defined structure.

## Why use Roles ?

**Modularity:** Each role handles a specific aspect of configuration or deployment, making it easier to develop, test, and maintain code.

**Reusability:** Roles can be reused across different playbooks and projects without duplicating code.

**Organization:** By following a standard structure, roles simplify the management of complex automation setups.

**Parameterization:** Roles support default variables that can be overridden, allowing flexible customization for different environments.

**Collaboration:** Teams can work on different roles independently, improving development velocity and reducing conflicts.

**Dependency Management:** Roles can specify dependencies on other roles, ensuring prerequisites are handled automatically Each role handles a specific aspect of configuration or deployment, making it easier to develop, test, and maintain code.


## How to Create ansible roles:
You can use a project-specific directory or the default /etc/ansible/roles/ directory

        mkdir -p ~/ansible/roles
        cd ~/ansible/roles

Initialize a New Role Using **Ansible Galaxy**

        ansible-galaxy init my_role


## Standard Directory Structure of a Role

- **tasks/:** Main list of tasks to execute (must contain main.yml)

- **handlers/:** Handlers triggered by tasks (must contain main.yml)

- **defaults/:** Default variables for the role (must contain main.yml)

- **vars/:** Other variables for the role (must contain main.yml)

- **files/:** Static files to be copied to managed nodes

- **templates/:** Jinja2 templates to be rendered and deployed

- **meta/:** Metadata about the role, including dependencies (must contain main.yml)

**Optional Fields:**

- **library/:**	Custom modules specific to the role (optional)

- **module_utils/:**	Custom module utilities for the role (optional)

- **lookup_plugins/:**	Custom lookup plugins for the role (optional)

- **README.md:**	Documentation describing the role (optional but recommended)

- **tests/:**	Test playbooks and inventory for validating the role (optional)

